README.md, before:

# minutePing

A status notifier written for the ESP8266 in MicroPython. Supports email notifications.

## Installation

Download the latest stable firmware for your ESP8266 from https://micropython.org/download/esp8266/

Linux:
```bash
git clone https://gitlab.com/coayer/minutePing.git

# creates Python venv in current directory and installs tools
python -m venv minutePing
source minutePing/bin/activate
pip install esptool rshell

sudo usermod -aG dialout $USER  # user needs dialout permissions or root

# might need to adjust path from /dev/ttyUSB0
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 --baud 460800 write\_flash --flash\_size=detect 0 esp8266-*.bin # might need to change firmware file path and baud rate

rshell
connect serial /dev/ttyUSB0
cp main.py umail.py uping.py ntp.py config.json /pyboard
```

To enable remote access, set up the MicroPython WebREPL while inside an rshell REPL prompt:
```bash
rshell
connect serial /dev/ttyUSB0
repl
```
`>>> import webrepl_setup`

Then visit http://micropython.org/webrepl/ and enter your board's IP address and WebREPL password.

While minutePing is checking services, the LED on the ESP8266 will blink. If the LED is stuck on or doesn't blink, reset the board using RST (a button on NodeMCU).

## Updating

#### MicroPython firmware

Follow the installation commands from the `esptool.py` commands onwards.

#### minutePing or `config.json` via `rshell`:
```bash
git clone https://gitlab.com/coayer/minutePing.git
rshell
connect serial /dev/ttyUSB0
cp minutePing/main.py /pyboard  # might also require an update to config.json
```

#### minutePing or `config.json` file via WebREPL

Follow the remote access setup above (under Installation) and visit http://micropython.org/webrepl/. 
Enter your board's IP address and WebREPL password and upload the new files with the "Send a file" option.
Click the terminal widget and press `CTRL+D` to reboot.


## Configuration

minutePing uses a JSON configuration file called `config.json`. For information on each option, refer to the sections below.

See `sample_config.json` for a starter configuration file. Either copy-paste into a new file called `config.json` or rename to `config.json` and fill in the blanks. 

To test the email configuration, set the `send_test_email` option to `true` in the `email` section. This will send a test email using the settings from `configuration.json` when minutePing starts. minutePing's emails may be marked as spam, so refer to your email provider's documentation on whitelisting email addresses. 

### Example configuration file format

```json
{
  "services": [{...}, {...}],

  "network": {...},

  "email": {...}
}
```

### Services

 - `name`: (Required) Identifiable name for service used in email notifications
 - `host`: (Required) IP address or hostname (eg `9.9.9.9` or `www.google.com`). HTTP services can include a path (eg `www.google.com/about`)
 - `type`: (Required) Must be `http`, `dns` or `icmp` (ping)
 - `port`: (Optional) Specifies port for HTTP services. Defaults to `80`
 - `check_interval`: (Optional) Time between checks in seconds. Defaults to `60`
 - `timeout`: (Optional) Timeout of request in seconds. Defaults to `1`
 - `notify_after_failures`: (Optional) Number of consecutive failures before service offline alert is sent. Defaults to `3`

Example:

```json
{
  "name": "google",
  "check_interval": 60,
  "type": "http",
  "port": 8080,
  "host": "www.google.com",
  "timeout": 2,
  "notify_after_failures": 2
}
```

### Network

 - `ssid`: (Required) SSID of WiFi network to connect to
 - `password`: (Required) Password of WiFi network
 - `static_address`: (Optional) Off by default (uses DHCP)
    - `ip`: (Required) IP address
    - `netmask`: (Required) Netmask of network
    - `gateway`: (Required) Network router
    - `dns`: (Required) DNS server

Example:

```json
{
  "ssid": "MyWiFiNetwork",
  "password": "hunter2", 
  "static_address": {
     "ip": "192.168.1.50", 
     "netmask": "255.255.255.0", 
     "gateway": "192.168.1.1", 
     "dns": "9.9.9.9"
    }
}
```

### Email

 - `recipient_addresses`: (Required) Email addresses to send alerts to. Can be single address or array
 - `smtp_server`: (Required) SMTP server
 - `port`: (Required) SMTP port
 - `ssl`: (Optional) Enables SSL. Defaults to `false`
 - `username`: (Required) SMTP username
 - `password`: (Required) SMTP password
 - `send_test_email`: (Optional) Will send a test email on boot. Defaults to `false`

Example:

```json
{
  "recipient_addresses": "targetemail@domain.com",
  "smtp_server": "smtp.mail.com",
  "port": 587,
  "ssl": true,
  "username": "me@mail.com",
  "password": "123456789"
}
```

Commit message:

async checking working for dns, http, icmp

README.md, after:

# minutePing

A status notifier written for the ESP8266 in MicroPython. Supports email notifications.

## Installation

Download the latest stable firmware for your ESP8266 from https://micropython.org/download/esp8266/

Linux:
```bash
git clone https://gitlab.com/coayer/minutePing.git

# creates Python venv in current directory and installs tools
python -m venv minutePing
source minutePing/bin/activate
pip install esptool rshell

sudo usermod -aG dialout $USER  # user needs dialout permissions or root

# might need to adjust path from /dev/ttyUSB0
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 erase_flash
esptool.py --port /dev/ttyUSB0 --baud 460800 write\_flash --flash\_size=detect 0 esp8266-*.bin # might need to change firmware file path and baud rate

rshell
connect serial /dev/ttyUSB0
cp main.py umail.py uping.py ntp.py config.json /pyboard
```

To enable remote access, set up the MicroPython WebREPL while inside an rshell REPL prompt:
```bash
rshell
connect serial /dev/ttyUSB0
repl
```
`>>> import webrepl_setup`

Then visit http://micropython.org/webrepl/ and enter your board's IP address and WebREPL password.

While minutePing is starting and while services are being checked, the LED on the ESP8266 will turn on. If the LED is stuck on or doesn't blink, power cycle or reset the board using RST.

#### Updating minutePing or `config.json` via WebREPL

Follow the remote access setup above (under Installation) and visit http://micropython.org/webrepl/. 
Enter your board's IP address and WebREPL password and upload the new files with the "Send a file" option.
Click the terminal widget and press `CTRL+D` to reboot.


## Configuration

minutePing uses a JSON configuration file called `config.json`. For information on each option, refer to the sections below.

See `sample_config.json` for a starter configuration file. Either copy-paste into a new file called `config.json` or rename to `config.json` and fill in the blanks. 

To test the email configuration, set the `send_test_email` option to `true` in the `email` section. This will send a test email using the settings from `configuration.json` when minutePing starts. minutePing's emails may be marked as spam, so refer to your email provider's documentation on whitelisting email addresses. 

### Example configuration file format

```json
{
  "services": [{...}, {...}],

  "network": {...},

  "email": {...}
}
```

### Services

 - `name`: (Required) Identifiable name for service used in email notifications
 - `host`: (Required) IP address or hostname (eg `9.9.9.9` or `www.google.com`). HTTP services can include a path (eg `www.google.com/about`)
 - `type`: (Required) Must be `http`, `dns` or `icmp` (ping)
 - `port`: (Optional) Specifies port for HTTP services. Defaults to `80`
 - `response_code`: (Optional) Specifies response code to check against for HTTP services. Defaults to `200`
 - `check_interval`: (Optional) Time between checks in seconds. Defaults to `60`
 - `timeout`: (Optional) Timeout of request in seconds. Defaults to `5`
 - `notify_after_failures`: (Optional) Number of consecutive failures before service offline alert is sent. Defaults to `3`

Example:

```json
{
  "name": "google",
  "check_interval": 60,
  "type": "http",
  "port": 8080,
  "host": "www.google.com/minutePing",
  "response_code": 404, 
  "timeout": 2,
  "notify_after_failures": 2
}
```

### Network

 - `ssid`: (Required) SSID of WiFi network to connect to
 - `password`: (Required) Password of WiFi network
 - `static_address`: (Optional) Off by default (uses DHCP)
    - `ip`: (Required) IP address
    - `netmask`: (Required) Netmask of network
    - `gateway`: (Required) Network router
    - `dns`: (Required) DNS server

Example:

```json
{
  "ssid": "MyWiFiNetwork",
  "password": "hunter2", 
  "static_address": {
     "ip": "192.168.1.50", 
     "netmask": "255.255.255.0", 
     "gateway": "192.168.1.1", 
     "dns": "9.9.9.9"
    }
}
```

### Email

 - `recipient_addresses`: (Required) Email addresses to send alerts to. Can be single address or array
 - `smtp_server`: (Required) SMTP server
 - `port`: (Required) SMTP port
 - `ssl`: (Optional) Enables SSL. Defaults to `false`
 - `username`: (Required) SMTP username
 - `password`: (Required) SMTP password
 - `send_test_email`: (Optional) Will send a test email on boot. Defaults to `false`

Example:

```json
{
  "recipient_addresses": "targetemail@domain.com",
  "smtp_server": "smtp.mail.com",
  "port": 587,
  "ssl": true,
  "username": "me@mail.com",
  "password": "123456789"
}
```
